Following an outbreak in Mecca Saudi Arabia in 2000, meningococcal strains expressing capsular group W (W) emerged as a major cause of invasive meningococcal disease (IMD) worldwide. The Saudi Arabian outbreak strain (Hajj clone) belonging to the ST-11 clonal complex (cc11) is similar to W cc11 causing occasional sporadic disease before 2000. Since 2000, W cc11 has caused large meningococcal disease epidemics in the African meningitis belt and endemic disease in South America, Europe and China. Traditional molecular epidemiologic typing suggested that a majority of current W cc11 burden represented global spread of the Hajj clone. However, recent whole genome sequencing (WGS) analyses revealed significant genetic heterogeneity among global W cc11 strains. While continued spread of the Hajj clone occurs in the Middle East, the meningitis belt and South Africa have co-circulation of the Hajj clone and other unrelated W cc11 strains. Notably, South America, the UK, and France share a genetically distinct W cc11 strain. Other W lineages persist in low numbers in Europe, North America and the meningitis belt. In summary, WGS is helping to unravel the complex genomic epidemiology of group W meningococcal strains. Wider application of WGS and strengthening of global IMD surveillance is necessary to monitor the continued evolution of group W lineages.

Capsular groups A, B, C, W (formerly W-135), Y and X cause almost all invasive meningococcal disease (IMD). Other virulence factors include major outer membrane proteins (OMP) - PorA, PorB, FetA and FHbp, and lipooligosaccharide

The Hajj clone was characterized as belonging to the ST-11 clonal complex (cc11), PorA antigen gene type P1.5,2, with a distinct pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) pattern and 16S ribosomal RNA (16S) type 31

Cc11 is a globally widespread, hyperinvasive clonal complex comprised of strains expressing capsular groups B, C, W and Y. Historically, cc11 was commonly associated with capsular group B in the 1960s and with group C from the early 1970s . Group W strains represented only a very small proportion of cc11 strains in the 1970s–1990s. Following the Hajj 2000 epidemic, cc11 became the predominant W lineage globally and the only group W lineage associated with epidemic disease. Sporadic group W belonging to other clonal complexes have occurred at low levels globally including cc22 in North America and Europe cc175 in the meningitis belt and cc174 in Brazil .

Meningococcal serotype and serosubtype are based on antigenic properties of PorB and PorA, respectively. Serologic classification has been superseded by gene sequence typing and the curated PubMLST database (pubmlst.org/neisseria/). The porB and fetA genotypes are often used to further characterize invasive meningococcal strains. The W cc11 lineage is characterized by a remarkably stable outer membrane allelic profile P1.5,2:F1–1:2–2 (PorA VR1,VR2:FetA:PorB) despite global spread and different epidemiologic patterns over four decades. Although the P1.18–1 porA allele predominates among W cc22 strains, OMP allelic profile variability among W cc22 isolates is consistent with non-clonal, sporadic disease (http:// pubmlst.org/neisseria/).

16S sequencing showed promise in discriminating the Hajj clone from other W cc11 strains not related to the Hajj epidemic. The Hajj clone contained 16S type 31 while sporadic W cc11 had 16S types 13 and 14. 16S type 31 was found in a case isolate in Brazil that was only 84% similar to the Hajj clone by PFGE.

Based on allelic profiles of 1546 core genes, Lucidarme et al. classified W cc11 into Anglo-French Hajj strains; Burkina Faso/North Africa strain and South American/UK strain. Similarly, based on antigenic profiles, SNP and core genome phylogenetic analyses, Mustapha et al. discriminated W cc11 strains linked to the Hajj clone from non-Hajj related endemic clusters and showed that the Hajj clone had undergone recombination that resulted in allelic changes within a number of virulence genes. The Hajj clone and its descendants shared a number of recombination events leading to allelic exchange within the fHbp gene and nor and aniA genes known to affect nasopharyngeal survival of meningococci. In summary, these WGS studies demonstrate significant genetic diversity within W cc11 lineage and that genetically distinct sub-lineages were associated with different geographic and epidemiologic settings. 

Initially 10 loci were chosen, but a subset of 7 loci was chosen on the basis of its discriminatory power. The SMPRL has extended this to incorporate an eighth gene, porA, which encodes a class I outer membrane protein. porA is used for characterizing N. meningitidis to sero-subtype level and provides information, along with serogroup and serotype data, for differentiating strains. However, this methodology is currently limited by the use of monoclonal antibodies, whereas porA sequencing can provide sequence data relating to a greater number of sero-subtypes. Sequence data from three variable regions (VRs) (VRs1, 2, and 3) can be obtained from within this gene 
 
Multilocus DNA fingerprinting (MLDF) is a rapid DNA restriction fragment-based technique for the characterization of five virulence-associated genes ( pilA, pilD, crgA, regF and iga). This method defines various alleles of these genes. This combination of pilA, pilD, crgA, regF and iga alleles, (4-1-1a-1-1, respectively) is characteristic of strains belonging to the sequence type ST-11, which is associated with strains of the ET-37 clonal complex
 
The capsule gene cluster, cps, is a 24-kb genetic island horizontally acquired by N meningitidis that is not present in closely related N. lactamica and N. gonorrhoeae. All known meningococcal serogroups had cps containing five gene regions involved in capsule synthesis, transport and assembly (cps regions A–E). Serogroups B, C, W and Y have capsules containing sialic acid residues. The transferase gene, located in region A, dictates linkages and thus determines serogroup phenotype. Capsular serogroup diversity among meningococci within the same clonal complex is driven by “capsular switching” - lateral exchange of capsule biosynthetic genes through homologous recombination. For a recombination event to result in change of capsular phenotype, allelic changes must include region A genes, particularly the transferase gene. Meningococcal capsular switching is relatively common and has been associated with the emergence and persistence of IMD. Capsular switching is also of public health relevance given that majority of meningococcal vaccines target the capsule.  
 
Additionally, W cc11 lineage was genetically heterogeneous, containing diverse phylogenetic clusters associated with the following: (1) the Hajj clone, (2) endemic W cc11 strains unrelated the Hajj clone in Africa, and (3) a distinct South American Wcc11 strain in Brazil, Argentina, Chile that has also emerged in United Kingdom. When M7124 (The Hajj strain M7124 (GenBank accession number CP009419.1) as a reference genome) cps sequences were compared with other cps reference sequences, a number of abrupt changes in sequence similarity consistent with distinct recombination events were identified. First, M7124 shares very high sequence similarity with the serogroup W cc22 reference strain a-275 over a 8.4-kb segment that includes all cps region A genes. Only three nucleotide differences are evident between M7124 and a-275 over the entire 8.4-kb segment. Flanking this segment of high sequence similarity are two areas of sharp divergence in sequence similarity in keeping with recombination breakpoints at nucleotide positions 858 and 804 on galE and cssA genes, respectively. In contrast, there were>1255 and 52 nucleotide differences between M7124 and a-275 within 5-kb upstream and downstream of the respective recombination breakpoints (data not shown). A recombination event with W cc22 as the likely donor strain is supported by alignment of galE and cssA gene sequences. Phylogenetic networks of meningococcal reference sequences across cps region A demonstrate that M7124 sequences were phylogenetically indistinguishable from corresponding W cc11 (WUE171) and W cc22 (a-275) strains, providing further evidence of this recombination event. Genes involved in this recombination event included galE (partial), galU,ctrG, cssF,csw,cscC, cssB and cssA (partial). The transferase gene, csw acquired within this recombination is responsible for capsular serogroup W phenotype.
 
The epidemic W cc11 strain, “Hajj clone,” and its descendants acquired virulence gene alleles outside of the cps cluster, through a set of unique recombination events affecting factor H binding protein (fHbp), nitric oxide reductase (nor) and nitrite reductase (aniA) genes.

The Hajj strain M7124 (GenBank accession number CP009419.1) is a reference genome.

The surface protein antigen genes, porA, porB, fetA, nadA, nhba, and fHbp, which encode, respectively, for class 1 outer membrane porin protein (PorA), class 2/3 outer membrane porin protein (PorB), iron-regulated Neisseria outer membrane protein (FetA), Neisseria adhesin A (NadA), Neisseria heparin binding antigen (NHBA), and factor H binding protein (fHbp) can be analyzed using the BIGSdb. 

To identify N. meningitidis, regardless of its serogroup, a PCR screen was designed that amplified a conserved regulatory gene in N. meningitidis, crgA. This gene is involved in the regulation of adhesion of N. meningitidis to target cells. For serogroup prediction (A, B, C, Y, and W135), a multiplex PCR was performed simultaneously with oligonucleotides in the siaD gene (serogroups B, C, Y, and W135) and in orf-2 of a gene cassette required for the biosynthesis of the capsule of serogroup A. 

Several genes including galE, lptA, lgtA, lpxL, and lpxH are required for the biosynthesis of meningococcal lipooligosaccharide (LOS), a group of molecules that is involved in the induction of the inflammatory and immune responses, as well as meningococcal virulence. 

Seven housekeeping genes (abcZ, adk, aroE, fumC, gdh, pdhC and pgm) of meningococcal strains are used for MLST for determination of their sequence types (ST)

The porA gene sequencing for the variable regions (VR1, VR2, and VR3), make it possible to assign them to families and variants on the database (http://neisseria.org/nm/typing/pora/query.shtm)

Recombination involving major outer membrane antigen genes - “antigenic shift” has been linked to increased incidence of meningococcal disease. Capsular switching - acquisition of novel capsule specific genes through recombination has also facilitates the emergence and persistence of virulent meningococcal lineages. 

There are several hypotheses that could explain the emergence of the Hajj clone and subsequent W ST-11 outbreaks worldwide. FHbp is a major meningococcal antigen and a virulence determinant that is a component of vaccines developed for protection against serogroup B strains. The introduction of a novel FHbp antigenic type into an immunologically naïve population may have played a part in the emergence of the Hajj clone. In support of this hypothesis, the fHbp allele 9 unique to the Hajj related strains, belongs to variant group 1/sub-family B and has limited immunologic cross reactivity with variant groups 2 and 3/sub-family A, which were prevalent among Cluster 2 strains. Similarly, antigenic shift was associated with increases in serogroup C and serogroup Y meningococcal disease in the U.S. in the 1990s. Alternatively, the genomic changes observed in the Hajj clone may be associated with increased virulence. For example, the nitrite reductase (aniA) gene - encoding a major outer membrane copper-containing protein, and the nitric oxide reductase (nor, sometimes referred to as norB) gene are both essential for overcoming oxidative stress and resistance to phagocytic lysis by macrophages. Also, N. meningitidis lacking the nor gene have been shown to survive poorly in human nasopharyngeal tissue. Together, these data suggest that allelic variation in key virulence determinants may have a potential contribution to WST-11 emergence. Then again, the genomic events (allelic exchange within fHbp, nor and aniA) observed could simply be markers of other, unidentified, genomic events that lead to changing epidemiologic behavior of W ST-11.
